---
id: 6846
title: 'Clean Code'
date: '2018-07-20T03:00:20-05:00'
author: 'Collin M. Barrett'
excerpt: 'Chapter one of Uncle Bob Martin''s "Clean Code" explains that professional developers write clean, expressive,
and artful code.'
layout: post-wp-import
guid: '/?p=6846'
permalink: /clean-code-1
redirect-from: /clean-code-1/
image: /assets/img/cleanCode_collinmbarrett.jpg
categories:
- Code
tags:
- Books
- Productivity
- Refactoring
- 'Visual Studio'
---

I am opening up [“Uncle” Bob Martin](https://twitter.com/unclebobmartin)‘s *Clean Code* for my third reading. This
programming classic serves as a foundational cover-to-cover read as well as a great topical desk reference. There have
been times in the last few years that I wish I could reallocate my university tuition towards memorizing and applying
every practice Martin outlines in this work rather than my coursework. I have and continue to sludge through so much bad
code in my career, that being able to sense and “clean” is one of the most valuable technical skills I can provide.

## Cost and Lifecycle of Messy Code

Martin kicks off this book with an example and walkthrough of an all-to-common application lifecycle plagued with bad
code. He described an unnamed company with a “killer app” that was eventually shut down because they could not ship
features and resolve bugs fast enough later in its life. One of the developers described the reason as:

> They had rushed the product to market and had made a huge mess in the code.

<figure aria-describedby="caption-attachment-7062" class="wp-caption alignleft" id="attachment_7062"
    style="width: 196px">[![xkcd: Good
    Code](/assets/img/goodCodeXkcd_collinmbarrett-196x300.png)](/assets/img/goodCodeXkcd_collinmbarrett.png)<figcaption
        class="wp-caption-text" id="caption-attachment-7062">[xkcd: Good Code](https://xkcd.com/844/)</figcaption>
</figure>

Projects are almost always under tremendous pressure by layers of management, product owners, and other stakeholders to
move fast. Efficiency is indeed essential, but when developers succumb to the pressure and move too quickly, they allow
technical debt to build and future costs to increase.

If messes grow to be too expensive to fix and extend, the team is ultimately forced to consider shutting the product
down or incurring the cost of a complete “grand redesign in the sky.” The elite tiger team chosen to tackle the rebuild
incurs the same messiness over time if they do not consistently have the stance of defending cleanliness.

It is the job of managers and product owners to deliver value to customers. It is the job of professional developers to
guard the quality of the code and provide valid estimates of cost. This responsibility can, at times, mean saying “no”
to managers.

> To drive this point home, what if you were a doctor and had a patient who demanded that you stop all the silly
hand-washing in preparation for surgery because it was taking too much time? Clearly the patient is the boss; and yet
the doctor should absolutely refuse to comply. Why? Because the doctor knows more than the patient about the risks of
disease and infection. It would be unprofessional (never mind criminal) for the doctor to comply with the patient.
>
> So too it is unprofessional for programmers to bend to the will of managers who don’t understand the risks of making
messes.

## Clean Code Defined

Martin reached out to some software legends to provide definitions of “clean code.” Pick up a copy of this book for
yourself to read them all, but my personal favorite is from [Michael
Feathers](https://michaelfeathers.silvrback.com/bio) (author of *Working Effectively with Legacy Code*):

> Clean code always looks like it was written by someone who cares. There is nothing obvious that you can do to make it
better. All of those things were thought about by the code’s author, and if you try to imagine improvements, you’re led
back to where you are, sitting in appreciation of the code someone left for you—code left by someone who cares deeply
about the craft.

## Authors and the Read/Write Ratio

Uncle Bob describes programmers as a type of author, responsible for communicating well. The vast majority of our time
(10:1) is spent reading the code, so when we do write, we must make it clear and expressive. Without being able to read
the existing code, there is no way to write more.

## (Boy) Scout Rule

Martin closes out the first chapter by sharing an adapted [Boy Scouts of America](https://www.scouting.org/) rule:

> Leave the campground cleaner than you found it.

[![Campsite Photo by Zach Betten,
https://unsplash.com/photos/K9olx8OF36A](/assets/img/campsite_collinmbarrett-300x199.jpg)](/assets/img/campsite_collinmbarrett.jpg)

Whether or not you choose to [include “Boy”](https://dev.to/ben/the-boy-scout-rule-is-now-the-scout-rule-420g) when
referring to it going forward, this classic rule can provide immense value to a development team that follows it. Code
naturally wants to rot entropically, so it takes continual effort to keep it clean.

I love this principle, and I try to implement it in every commit. I do experience tension, though, when working in
legacy (no unit tests) applications. What levels and scopes can I or should I safely clean while resolving issues?

TDD purists might say not to make changes of any kind without unit tests. I am personally comfortable performing things
like renaming and method extraction if I am primarily using refactoring tools like what IDEs ([Visual
Studio](/tag/visual-studio/)) and IDE extensions (ReSharper) provide. If the cleaning would require me to type changes
manually, I try not to trust myself to do so in a non-unit-tested codebase.

## Defining the Developer’s “Done”

For me, this book is all about defining what “done” means to the software developer. Sure, “done” should involve steps
such as QA validation and acceptance testing. However, at what point are the developer’s changes indeed code complete?

Code that is “done” should not just work. It should be expressive, easy to navigate, and a breeze to extend.

Any mediocre programmer can make something work. Master developers write code that is artful, not only so that it is
aesthetically pleasing, but so that it is easy to locate and squash bugs, extend functionality, and pivot entire modules
in the future. Professional developers have a long-term view and author code that reflects that.